# Project Synthesis Directory

This directory contains files for synthesizing this project into either a Verilog gatelevel netlist (using the Yosys synthesis tool), or, a Xilinx programming file (`.bit`) for use with the Papilio hardware.

## Makefile

Target       | Description
-------------|-----------------
`bit`        | Executes the Xilinx ISE tools to convert source RTL into a Xilinx programming file that can be loaded onto the Papilio Pro board (via the `make papilio` target).
`papilio`    | Copies the Xilinx-generated `.bit` file onto the Papilio Pro's FPGA. Requires superuser permissions and assumes the Papilio Pro is connected via USB. Note that this project comes with a pre-build programming file; a new file can be generated using the `make bit` target.
`netlist`    | Generates a Verilog gatelevel netlist using the Yosys synthesis tool. This output (`.vg` file) is for educational use only; it is not used to program the Papilio's Xilinx chip.

## Synthesis files

File         | Description
-------------|-----------------
[`konami.prj`](konami.prj) | A Xilinx ISE project file (plain-text); specifies the source RTL files used in this design. This file was generated using the Xilinx `ise` GUI.
[`konami.xst`](konami.xst) | A Xilinx Synthsis Technology script (plain-text); provides switches and options for the synthesis tool. This file was generated using the Xilinx `ise` GUI.
[`synthesize.ys`](synthesize.ys)     | A Yosys synthesis script (plain-text) describing how to generate a gatelevel netlist for this project's source RTL. Generated by hand.
