# Seven Segment Counter

A circuit that displays a rapidly incrementing value on the four-digit seven-segment displays found on the Papilio LogicStart MegaWing hardware.

This is slightly more complicated than one might expect:

Our hardware has four seven-segment displays that, together, are equipped only with 7 segment pins (segment_[6:0]) and 4 enable pins (digit_enable_[3:0]). This means we can't "drive" all four digits independently all at the same time (as you might have assumed we could--that would require 28 signals). Instead, we drive each digit for a fraction of a second, then move on to the next digit. This cycling occurs too quickly to be seen by the human eye.

To make matters worse, we need to give the circuit some time to "cool off" between driving one digit and the next. If we don't, we'll see flickering and ghosting of the previous digit's value.


## Makefile

Target       | Description
-------------|------------
`compile`    | Compiles Verilog RTL into an internal format optimized for simulation by Icarus Verilog; generated objects are written to the `/gen` directory. Invoked implicitly when using the `simulate` target.
`simulate`   | Executes the Verilog simulation producing a VCD waveform as output: `waveform.vcd`.
`synthesize` | Translates the design into a Verilog netlist (a wiring of logic gates and flip-flops with all high-level Verilog language constructs removed). <br><br> For demonstration purposes only; Xilinx tools must be used to synthesize the design for use on the Papilio's FPGA.
`fpga`       | Copies the Xilinx-generated `.bit` file onto the Papilio Pro's FPGA. Requires superuser permissions and assumes the Papilio Pro is connected via USB. Note that this file must be generated using the Xilinx `ise` tool and placed into the `papilio/` directory; it cannot be generated by this makefile.
`clean`      | Removes generated files produced by the `compile`, `simulate` and `synthesize` targets.

## Design files in this project

File | Description
-----|------------
`rtl/seven-segment.v` | Top-level circuit module; instantiates four binary coded decimal to seven-segment coders, plus one display driver to multiplex the segment signals.
`rtl/bcd-coder.v` | Converts a _binary coded decimal_ (BCD) value to the set of segments that should be lit in order to display the number. (BCD is a 3-bit binary value representing the quantities 0..9, and ignoring the remaining bit patterns `3'd10` and `3'd11`.)
`rtl/display-driver.v` | Circuit that accepts four seven-input segment signals and multiplexes them onto the hardware's single segment/enable bus (driving each character for a fraction of a second).
`test/testbench.vt` | Circuit test bench.
`papilio/papilio-pro.ucf` | User constraints file providing a mapping of logical ports (defined in Verilog) to physical pins on the FPGA.
