# Breathing LED

This circuit causes all eight LEDs on the Papilio LogicStart MegaWing to "breath". That is, the brightness of the LEDs slowly modulate from dim to bright, then bright to dim.

LED brightness can be achieved by rapidly turning on and off the LED; the longer we leave the LED on, the brighter it will appear. So long as we "flash" the LED at a high rate, this will be imperceptible to the human eye. This circuit uses a 128 clock-cycle period in which a varying fraction of that period the LED is driven on.

To create a breathing effect, we slowly modulate the brightness level, first increasing it until it reaches 100%, then slowly decreasing it.

## Makefile

Target       | Description
-------------|------------
`compile`    | Compiles Verilog RTL into an internal format optimized for simulation by Icarus Verilog; generated objects are written to the `/gen` directory. Invoked implicitly when using the `simulate` target.
`simulate`   | Executes the Verilog simulation producing a VCD waveform as output: `waveform.vcd`.
`synthesize` | Translates the design into a Verilog netlist (a wiring of logic gates and flip-flops with all high-level Verilog language constructs removed). <br><br> For demonstration purposes only; Xilinx tools must be used to synthesize the design for use on the Papilio's FPGA.
`fpga`       | Copies the Xilinx-generated `.bit` file onto the Papilio Pro's FPGA. Requires superuser permissions and assumes the Papilio Pro is connected via USB. Note that this file must be generated using the Xilinx `ise` tool and placed into the `papilio/` directory; it cannot be generated by this makefile.
`clean`      | Removes generated files produced by the `compile`, `simulate` and `synthesize` targets.

## Design files in this project

File | Description
-----|------------
[`rtl/seven-segment.v`](rtl/seven-segment.v) | Top-level circuit module; drives LEDs in a breathing pattern.
[`test/testbench.vt`](test/testbench.vt) | Circuit test bench.
[`papilio/papilio-pro.ucf`](papilio/papilio-pro.ucf) | User constraints file providing a mapping of logical ports (defined in Verilog) to physical pins on the FPGA.
