# Knight Rider

A simple integrated circuit that cycles the  LogicStart MegaWing's eight LEDs back-and-forth in a pattern reminiscent of Kit from Knight Rider.

## Makefile

Target       | Description
-------------|------------
`compile`    | Compiles Verilog RTL into an internal format optimized for simulation by Icarus Verilog; generated objects are written to the `/gen` directory. Invoked implicitly when using the `simulate` target.
`simulate`   | Executes the Verilog simulation producing a VCD waveform as output: `waveform.vcd`.
`synthesize` | Translates the design into a Verilog netlist (a wiring of logic gates and flip-flops with all high-level Verilog language constructs removed). <br><br> For demonstration purposes only; Xilinx tools must be used to synthesize the design for use on the Papilio's FPGA.
`fpga`       | Copies the Xilinx-generated `.bit` file onto the Papilio Pro's FPGA. Requires superuser permissions and assumes the Papilio Pro is connected via USB. Note that this file must be generated using the Xilinx `ise` tool and placed into the `papilio/` directory; it cannot be generated by this makefile.
`clean`      | Removes generated files produced by the `compile`, `simulate` and `synthesize` targets.

## Design files in this project

File | Description
-----|------------
`rtl/knight-rider.v` | Top-level circuit module; drives eight LEDs in a Knight Rider pattern.
`test/testbench.vt` | Circuit test bench.
`papilio/papilio-pro.ucf` | User constraints file providing a mapping of logical ports (defined in Verilog) to physical pins on the FPGA.
