# RS232 UART and Loopback

This circuit implements an RS232 UART (universal asynchronous receiver and transmitter).

## Makefile

Target       | Description
-------------|------------
`compile`    | Compiles Verilog RTL into an internal format optimized for simulation by Icarus Verilog; generated objects are written to the `/gen` directory. Invoked implicitly when using the `simulate` target.
`simulate`   | Executes the Verilog simulation producing a VCD waveform as output: `waveform.vcd`.
`synthesize` | Translates the design into a Verilog netlist (a wiring of logic gates and flip-flops with all high-level Verilog language constructs removed). <br><br> For demonstration purposes only; Xilinx tools must be used to synthesize the design for use on the Papilio's FPGA.
`fpga`       | Copies the Xilinx-generated `.bit` file onto the Papilio Pro's FPGA. Requires superuser permissions and assumes the Papilio Pro is connected via USB. Note that this file must be generated using the Xilinx `ise` tool and placed into the `papilio/` directory; it cannot be generated by this makefile.
`clean`      | Removes generated files produced by the `compile`, `simulate` and `synthesize` targets.

## Design files in this project

File | Description
-----|------------
[`rtl/loopback.v`](rtl/loopback.v) | Top-level module; instantiates a UART configured for loopback (that is, echoing received data back to sender).
[`rtl/uart.v`](rtl/uart.v) | UART circuit for serializing/deserializing data from the FTDI USB chip.
[`rtl/tx.v`](rtl/tx.v) | UART transmiter module.
[`rtl/rx.v`](rtl/rx.v) | UART receiver module.
[`test/testbench.vt`](test/testbench.vt) | Circuit test bench.
[`papilio/papilio-pro.ucf`](papilio/papilio-pro.ucf) | User constraints file providing a mapping of logical ports (defined in Verilog) to physical pins on the FPGA.
